# Axioms and CI implication

After [installing `CInet::Tools`](/install), you can start the program `CImake`:

``` console
$ CImake
0> 
```

This presents you with a REPL (read-eval-print loop) for you to enter
Perl code, similar to [`polymake`]. The REPL is just an interface to a
standard Perl interpreter with all the CInet modules loaded.

Using `CInet::Tools`, axioms for CI structures can easily be written
down. A *semigraphoid* is a set of conditional independence statements
which is closed under the following boolean formula

$$
  (ij|L) \wedge (ik|jL) \Rightarrow (ik|L) \wedge (ij|kL)
$$

for any distinct $i, j, k$ and a set $L$ disjoint from $ijk$. The module
[`CInet::Propositional`] provides syntactic sugar which allows us to define
semigraphoids in a similarly succinct fashion:

``` console
0> propositional Semigraphoids = cube (ijk|L) -> (ij|L) & (ik|jL) => (ik|L) & (ij|kL);
# time=00:00.00
```

Some remarks about this line are in order since it deviates from usual
Perl code. It uses the powerful [`Keyword::Declare`] module to hijack
the Perl parser and add our own syntax extensions. In this case, the
`propositional` keyword switches from the usual Perl parser to our own,
which understands a math-like syntax for CI axioms.

The other remark concerns terminology around `cube`s. By pure coincide,
the faces of the $n$-dimensional hypercube $C_n$ index many important
concepts in the theory of conditional independence structures. Its points
(vertices) correspond to subsets of $[n]$ and therefore to subvectors of a
random vector. Its edges (1-faces) are described by non-empty subsets with
a distinguished element. We use $(i|L)$ to denote the edge that goes from
vertex $L$ to vertex $iL$, whenever $i \not\in L$. Edges index elementary
functional dependence statements. Lastly, squares (2-faces) are similarly
indexed by $(ij|L)$ where $i \not= j$ and $L \cap ij = \emptyset$. This
symbol corresponds to the 2-face with vertices $L, iL, jL, ijL$ and it
indexes an elementary conditional independence statement.

The part `cube (ijk|L)` in the above statement specifies that the following
axioms require distinct atoms $i,j,k$ and an arbitrary disjoint subset $L$
of the ground set. The axioms given after the arrow `->` will be replicated
for every such $3$-face of the $n$-cube.

The result of this statement in our `CImake` environment is that it defines
a function `Semigraphoids` which can be called with a ground set argument.
This results in a sequence ([`CInet::Seq::Propositional`]) to be created
for dealing with the set of all semigraphoids on that ground set.
This sequence has a SAT solver ([`CInet::ManySAT`]) attached which allows
to efficiently test membership, count or enumerate all elements.

``` console
1> Semigraphoids(3)->count
22 # time=00:00.01
2> Semigraphoids(4)->count
26424 # time=00:00.03
```

The symmetric group $S_n$ acts on the ground $[n]$ and it induces an action
on the cube $C_n$ and its face lattice which preserves the dimension of each
face. In particular, there is a resulting action on CI structures as sets of
2-faces. This symmetry is implemented in `CInet::Symmetry`. The sequence
object generated by `Semigraphoids` can be reduced modulo this symmetry
using the following built-in function:

``` console
3> Semigraphoids(4)->modulo(SymmetricGroup)->count
1512 # time=00:00.35
```

This still takes less than a second to compute! Semigraphoids are also
closed under the entire symmetry group of the $n$-cube, also known as
the hyperoctahedral group $B_n$. This is implemented as well:

``` console
4> Semigraphoids(4)->modulo(HyperoctahedralGroup)->count
629 # time=00:00.82
```

Our final note about axioms in this tutorial is that axiom systems like
`Semigraphoid` can be reused. *Graphoids* are semigraphoids which also
fulfill the intersection axiom.

``` console
5> propositional Graphoids = cube(ijk|L) -> Semigraphoids, (ij|kL) & (ik|jL) => (ij|L) & (ik|L);
6> Graphoids(4)->count
6482 # time=00:00.11
```

If a graphoid also satisfies upwards stability and weak transitivity,
then it is an undirected graphical model. Due to faithfulness of these
models, the following is a very roundabout way of counting undirected
graphs:

``` console
7> propositional UndirectedGraphs = cube(ijk|L) -> Graphoids, (ij|L) => (ij|kL), (ij|L) => (ik|L) | (jk|L);
8> 0+ UndirectedGraphs(4)->count
64 # time=00:00.02
9> 0+ UndirectedGraphs(5)->count
1024 # time=00:00.16
10> 0+ UndirectedGraphs(6)->count
32768 # time=00:25.02
```

The last line took 25 seconds to execute! Recall that the `->count` method
uses an exact model counter (or \#SAT solver), in this case the program
`dsharp`, on the boolean formula assembled from the given axioms. One piece
of advice from years of using SAT solvers: It is sometimes more efficient
to *enumerate* all solutions to the formula using an AllSAT solver ---
especially when the number of solutions is comparatively small --- and to
count the elements in the result set. This can work because counters and
enumerators use very different algorithms and sometimes the enumeration
strategy is more powerful against a given formula.

``` console
11> 0+ UndirectedGraphs(6)->list
32768 # time=00:02.30
```

## References

* <a name="Stu05">[Stu05]</a> M. Studený: *Probabilistic conditional independence structures*. Springer, 2005.

[`polymake`]: https://polymake.org/doku.php
[`CInet::Propositional`]: /doc/CInet::Propositional
[`CInet::ManySAT`]: /doc/CInet::ManySAT
[`CInet::Seq::Propositional`]: /doc/CInet::Seq::Propositional
[`Keyword::Declare`]: https://metacpan.org/pod/Keyword::Declare
